[Music]
thank you for having us I'm Ashley and
I'm Carmen we wanted to talk to you guys
about neuro speculative afro feminism
but also about kind of our process and
the work the deep work that we're trying
to do in order to subvert some of the
structural systems that exist that are
but what we really wanted to do this in
a way that we kind of deconstruct our
design thinking and our process a lot of
people ask us how we made this
experience what drove us to do that and
we thought it would be a great
opportunity to do that
deconstruction here with this audience
so yeah so we have when we were creating
this project we were looking at past
projects that we really admired and we
decided to come up with our own pipeline
which started with looking at what the
problems that we encounter as designers
and as educators trying to do a design
intervention inside the fields that we
work in and then creating the call to
action to other designers and educators
so this is going to be a case study of
our own project so you guys can see how
we've gone from where we were nine
months ago to where we are now and I
also want to just throw it out there
that I volunteered this festival last
year and so in a couple months you can
really make some change and you can do
something and get yourself on this stage
and that's what we hope to inspire other
people to do so we debuted neural
speculative afro feminism at Sundance in
January and then we were fortunate
enough to go to South by Southwest and
we're just coming off of showing this
piece at Tribeca so we've been able to
get a lot of feedback that relates
directly to the messages that we're
trying to tell through VR through
speculative design thinking and through
you through research and through looking
at problems and coming from a
multidisciplinary approach there's many
issues that need to be tackled and need
to be addressed and we wanted to
specifically look at the digital and
technological discrimination that we
have felt and that we've experienced as
women who are of color as well as I'm an
structural engineer Ashley's a cell
molecular biologist and so we started
reading some papers and books and we're
reaching out and seeing what other
people are talking about and we hope we
happened upon one paper called Tech does
technology have a race and we started
speaking with Stephanie Dinkins who's
looking at bina48 and what algorithmic
biases what conscious biases or
unconscious biases and how can we really
dig deep and kind of start to dismantle
these structures and dark matters is a
book written about surveillance and
especially how surveillance relates to
the black community and blackness and
these are two areas where we thought
that we could really make a difference
in how we are perceiving people who are
outside of the dominant power structures
especially in technology in STEM fields
specifically math science and also
installation art and emerging technology
virtual reality we're trying to answer
the question where do we fit in these
places and beside ourselves who else is
going to fight for us to be there
because we are the communities that are
most impacted and we want to be allies
of those communities so those are
communities of color displaced and
stateless people immigrants queer gender
non-conforming non-binary and cyber
Womanism
inclusive Womanism what does it mean to
be a woman in our current society and
what we found in doing our research is
that we really do we are for
what we don't know and so we're trying
to address that from the moment you look
at our project - and then all of the
aspects of our project so our project is
even called neuro speculative afro
feminism and we wanted to play with
these disparate ideas of what it means
to be a black woman in a space of
Technology specifically thinking about
the future evolution of our brains and
if we can tell a multi-layered story
that really projects us into this future
and we're really inspired by the
afrofuturism movement and so a lot of
our design decisions a lot of the
stories that we tell a lot of our
perceptions are based on that but in
order to combat the thing that we don't
know we need to have something that ties
us to a familiar space so we created or
recreated a beauty salon into a brain
salon and in this space we had three
places we have a gift shop where you can
interact with our products we have the
brain lab which is usually in the back
and it's where we're talking about
cognitive enhancement and cognitive
impact and that's where we're conducting
our research but we put you in this
place that is just like a salon that you
will sit in but instead of getting your
hair cut you put on a VR and have a
simulation of an optimization therapy
and we wanted to see if we can use
virtual reality as a tool to increase
exposure to content created by artists
and communities of color and see if we
can use it as a tool to decrease
prejudice and bias and how we're doing
that is building out a methodology for
studying VR outside of academia and in
public spaces and we found also that you
know VR as an emerging technology is it
can be very jolting because you have
this out of head out-of-body experience
so when we put you in our physical salon
it represents our digital space so that
it's familiar so you're continuing and
transcending your physical built
environment - into this virtual digital
world yet you're familiar
with it and you know where things are
and it's all very mirrored and so the
next thing we're going to talk about is
how to do a design intervention what are
the most important aspects of when you
want to intervene and disciplines and
change things how can you do that and we
did that first by looking at products
and all of our products if you're more
interested are available to see and
interact with but we'll explain all of
them right now
so all of our products are highlighting
themes of security protection visibility
and surveillance especially as they
relate to black the black experience and
specifically in this project but we plan
to look at this in very different
iterations as we go and the first thing
we landed on creating was a transparent
sunscreen so often when you buy
sunscreen off the shelf it contains zinc
oxide and you put it on and especially
if you have darker skin it leaves a
white film behind there are a lot of
companies who are thinking about tinted
solutions or transparent solutions but
they're a lot more expensive and it's so
often that as women of color either have
to modify products to fit us or we can't
use them so we really wanted this to be
a provocation for designers to really
think about the communities who they're
designing for who has access to products
and how are they including them in the
design decisions once they're creating
something next we wanted to make an
earring that was video and audio enabled
there has been a lot of instances of
police violence which this earring was
directly inspired by just this past week
we wanted to create a tool that had
video and audio embedded in an everyday
object so that people could start
recording with a touch of a button and
then upload that footage to a database
that will then be escalated to the
appropriate authorities no matter who
they are and then next we designed a
scarf called hyper face with the privacy
artist Adam Harvey that's the counter
surveillance tool so it confuses
computer vision algorithms
and you want to talk a little bit more
magic and so what this does is it has
1,200 phases in it
this is our first iteration of it and it
is a trigger for OpenCV facial detection
algorithm and it works very well you can
demo it with your your camera or your
snapchat and it starts to camouflage you
so your face will still be detected but
then all of the other faces on the scarf
start popping up with facial detection
squares all around them and then the
next project or the next product that we
created is a symbolic representation of
microaggressions and code-switching we
created a visor with a dichroic material
that reflects one color and let's pass
through another so when you have this on
and somebody is aggressive toward you
you can put the visor on and stop the
interaction because their being gets
reflected back to them and their
malicious gaze or their attitude and
then the last product that we created
are called the transcranial electrodes
they're the octavia electrodes so this
is a reimagine a ssin of a technology
that exists that is a very hot topic in
the bio hacking and quantified self
communities where people are using a
technique called transcranial
stimulation to see if they can get
themselves into hyper focused or flow
states where you're able to focus on a
task and remember information more
readily so in a way it's a tool that
might optimize the brain but the problem
is is that if you have a lot of hair or
textured hair or locs or braids you
can't really use it so we were like well
this is something that we're interested
in and if we wanted to recreate this as
something that we could use how do we do
that so we're like let's embed it in
hair extensions and you know see what
that would look like if you go into a
familiar space to have this technique
done so I'm going to access it with
braiding technique exactly and then what
we're doing is we're using this product
instead of actually like sending
electricity to your brain we're
simulating that in virtual reality so
we're creating a
neuro cosmetology lab where Brooks and
Naima are protagonists are the owners
and inventors of this technology and you
arrived for a optimization session
[Music]
so we want to see if we can figure out a
way to create a new black American
mythology and BR and doing that in a way
that really uplifts and gets people to
think critically about who they are in
their place in the future especially in
these emerging technologies we saw that
you know in product design there wasn't
enough representation in virtual reality
there wasn't enough representation and
as scientists and engineers those are
the fields that we're familiar with
there also isn't enough representation
and we need to be the ones for talking
about this so we started building spaces
we started building these familiar
salons in these film festivals and then
also taking it to schools and engaging
with communities and B we became the
translators we became the people that
were going between the institutions and
the industry talking about themes that
are relevant and important to us and
seeing if in building trust and creating
a safe space to talk about issues that
we typically don't want to talk about if
that somehow will push us towards the
future where we all are granted access
so this is a image of our experience at
Tribeca and as Ashley was saying it is a
lot about building trust we're talking
about issues that a lot of people don't
want to talk about and we're constantly
having to defend our role in the project
and our right to be talking about these
things and once you see us as humans you
can understand that we're trying to make
this this space this new space that
younger generations are going to be
designing for and designing in a safe
space for them so we're trying to
constantly ignite the community we're
trying to keep and continue our
connections with them we're trying to
inspire young people
they can start putting themselves into
these spaces and once we do this kind of
intervention and implementation really
getting their feedback and understanding
how can how are they engaging and what
is the best way so this is the image of
one of the build outs that we did at
South by Southwest and we had a lot of
young people coming in to do it that I
had never done VR before this was their
first introduction to it and to see the
impact that it had on them and
encouraged them to think about either
becoming content creators or seeing
virtual reality as something that they
have their stories told in so we'll go
pretty quickly because we have only a
couple minutes but we really want you
guys to think about repurposing spaces
what spaces are you a part of that could
be used in different ways
do you know museums or galleries sports
places nature and what is your
headquarters and your offices what are
they doing can you bring the community
in and start teaching do you guys have
technology that you're developing can
you train the people inside that your
community because you can't divorce the
people that you live with from the
content and the work that you're doing
and this is an example of a repurposed
space if any of you guys are familiar
with the Stony Island Arts Bank in
Chicago it was an old bank that has been
purchased by Fiesta gates and artists
and along with the Johnsons publication
companies they've created a space for
community engagement for arts for music
for literature and we were fortunate
enough to be able to show NSA F there so
this is a library that contains all of
the references from the Johnson
Foundation who I don't know if how many
of you are familiar with it but they are
the publishing house that produced
evany and Jet magazine so there is
archives upon archives there we were
able to show
NSS there and a lot of people from the
community came in and we had a really
really good discussion about emerging
technology and art and literature and it
was it was really nice to see that a lot
of students from the school of the Art
Institute came a lot of people who just
enjoy the arts and patron the space
often because it's free to go and then a
lot of children were there as well and
we also during this time we gave a
workshop about how to what vr is how to
build in VR start thinking about virtual
reality because this is an emerging
medium and we can tell our stories and
we should be telling our stories in here
we also went to the school of the Art
Institute and talked to young people who
are you know animators and creators and
started you know encouraging them to
speak about things that affect them so
and everyone's been really really
receptive to it and I think that's
through the ideas the fact that we've
crossed pollinated and we've taken a
multidisciplinary approach right so
we're we're using art as an entry point
to talk about science and technology and
retention in these spaces because we
found that it's not enough to be the
only one and if you're the only one you
know you have to hold the door open so
that someone else can also come in and
be a part of you know the things that
are affecting that in a lot of ways and
you if you are one of many maybe it's
time to give your seat up if you're
talking about the same things so that
you can learn and expose more people to
new ideas this is in San Francisco State
University we were able to meet with
biologists with with film students
ethnic studies group and we brought them
all together in this one room and kind
of spoke similarly about the project as
well as God gave them the VR experience
so we find that it's super important to
create a design curriculum and to ask
difficult questions what are the tools
that we are creating and how can we
address
real existing problems how can we take a
human design centered approach using new
technology and new media what other
groups are doing this what kind of case
studies can we make and what kind of
focus groups can we develop so that we
can create more engaging more meaningful
work and why isn't the current model
working so this is a focus group that we
did a new Inc where were residents in
New York and we you know got together
with a bunch of women and asked them how
they wanted to engage with this and how
they felt their role in technology and
in the future was being represented and
how could it how could we help augment
that this project all started because we
were you know we're very interested in
neuroscience and we were looking for
mentors in the field who you know
represented who we were and so we found
one woman dr. Joanne Berger Sweeney who
was going to give up and give a talk to
her colleagues and she opens her TED
talk with where all the black woman in
neuroscience and you can transpose that
sentence across a number of fields and
you know in order to begin addressing
those questions and really answering
them and thinking through them it takes
you know putting yourself out there and
creating the work that you want to see
we also think it's super important to
invite the children they are the ones
who will be shaping our world in the
future and so they need to be part of
the conversation as we create meaningful
work very they're going to be choosing
their own identity and we need to allow
them to choose whatever identity they
want and get the feedback from them so
we did get a couple kids at Sundance and
at South by one of the most interesting
experiences for me at Sundance was
there's a little boy who is running
around saying good speculative afro
feminism and if that becomes part of his
vernacular at six or seven years old how
is his
well you know what is the long-term
return on investment for this kind of
work yeah so he sees the characters that
we've made as someone some something
that he could look up to even if they
didn't look like him so we're trying to
broaden people's perceptions and their
horizons and then this is our call to
action to you guys as designers as
techies whatever you are to do something
about the situation that we're in and we
want you to really go beyond what would
be easy or what would be comfortable
this is difficult work a lot of work
it's a lot of work and we've seen a lot
of not so difficult work and we need to
push ourselves to make things that move
us and we weren't being moved as as
scientists and engineers nor the artists
so we had to create something or so and
also we talked a lot about these
buzzwords diversity and inclusion and
you know we talk about it we talk about
it and talk about it but how are we
implementing and thinking through what
will work and what actually doesn't work
and how we can move beyond this
conversation and and see what people are
capable of and this is an example of how
things don't work on the right we have
an individual who can fit a headset on
his head quite easily and on the left we
have somebody who has a lot of hair and
it it isn't easy and why isn't it easy
the designers aren't looking outside
their frame of reference their body
their experience and so we're creating
more products that don't fit all of us
and how can we subvert that and how do
we move beyond this fear yeah that's a
call to action thinking through you know
how can you every day move beyond your
comfort zone and and the things that you
know you may be afraid of and so that's
where we as a team came together this is
our
core team Nissan is from Israel I'm from
San Francisco and my father's Mexican
Ashley is from Los Angeles AJ is from
Turkey and we're trying to address large
issues from a global perspective and
we've gotten a lot of flack surveys and
but it's still something that needs to
be addressed and it's still something
that we're going to fight for and we
want to do it together because in the
end we're all friends and we all support
each other and we want to see everyone
grow but also beyond that some iteration
of this other ring exists throughout the
world you know so here it may look one
way in Germany may look another way in
Turkey it may look something like
something else but EPS of core it's all
the same we've forgotten that we're all
humans we all have the same experiences
and how can we move beyond our own
prejudice and bias whether it's
conscious or unconscious to see that so
here are some other critical issues we'd
like to bring our attention to and that
we'd like to challenge you guys to would
be addressing so that's the assault to
our environment that defunding of arts
and our education systems the rich and
poor divided and reimagining low-income
housing drug addition addictions throw
away labor and the prison industrial
complex and so this is this project is
for all the boys and women and one girl
we're losing everyone is it for our
mothers this is for our planet and we
really hope that we can inspire you guys
to do something and change the world so
thank you
[Applause]
[Music]